Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Alan
Buchanan. In our first interview, we talked about his
book, Our Moral Fate, and today we're talking about
his latest one. Ideology and revolution, how the struggle
against domination drives the evolution of morality and institutions.
So, Doctor Buchanan, welcome back to the show. It's
always a huge pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you for having me.
So, uh, tell us first, what is, before we
get into specifics here, what is the main argument
of your book?
OK, the idea is that this is a contribution
to understanding social change. And that one driver of
social change is a kind of co-evolutionary interaction between
hierarchs, people who occupy positions of power and authority
over others, and people who resist their exercising that
control. So there's a continuing struggle between hierarchs and
resisters to hierarchy. And the idea is that in
this struggle, Each party has to form coalitions to
be effective, and to form coalitions, they have to.
Invoke ideologies that include ideas about how you rightfully
come to have power and how you rightfully exercise
power. And so different concepts about authority and inequality,
and about the justification of authority and the inequality
goes with it, they evolve and change over time
through this interaction. And I use an analogy. Between
uh uh uh uh the idea of a, of
a parasite attacking a host organism. The parasite is
the hierarchs, the host organism is the rest of
us. And the parasite attacks, and the host organism
develops some kind of defense, some way of resisting
the pathogen. And then, The pathogen, the parasite mutates
and develops a better strategy that tries to go
around the defense that's just been developed by the
host organism, and so on and so on. So,
there's a co-evolutionary process, uh, and in this process
are generated all sorts of new moral ideas, moral
concepts, and institutions to embody them. So that's the,
the basic idea. If you want to understand social
change, one aspect of social change is changing ideas
about authority, about hierarchy. And about when it's justified
and when it isn't justified. And the only way
you can understand that process and why, for example,
now we have the concept of the rule of
law, uh, and the concept of democracy, which earlier
generation didn't have, you have to look at the
particulars of this interaction between hierarchies, hierarchs and resistor
to hierarchy. So that's the basic idea.
Uh, BUT why is it important to, to understand
social change in your mind?
Oh, excellent question. Well, ultimately, the reason I'm interested
in social change is because I'm interested in the
possibilities for moral progress, that is for social change
that's good from a moral point of view. And
to try to understand moral progress and to try
to know how we can bring it about, you
have to understand the mechanisms of social change, right?
You can't just propose some better state of affairs
and say, well, now let's do it, right? You've
got to understand what the feasibility constraints are. About
how social change really occurs and whether the, the,
the better state that you are hoping for can
come about through the actual processes that are available
for social change. So the idea is we know
more about this, we could perhaps guide social change
in a better direction. That's the hope.
And, uh, explain your approach to social change, the
one you present in your book. Tell us about
your conflict theory of social change.
OK. Uh, FIRST of all, the theory has two
parts that are closely related. There's a descriptive explanatory
part of the theory. And it doesn't make moral
judgments. It just tries to describe some of the
mechanisms of change, not in general, but about changes
that have to do with political institutions and our
understandings of what justifies them. So there's the descriptive
explanatory part. That's a kind of social science enterprise.
Then there's the normative part, that is the attempt
to develop some. Theory, some set of principles that
allows you to evaluate the changes that have been
described and explained by the social science part of,
of the theory. And my idea is that uh
what you get when you combine these things is
a conflict theory of certain kinds of social changes,
conflict between hierarchs and resistor to hierarchy. Now this
is uh similar and different in some ways from
Marx's theory of history, right? He has a conflict
theory also, conflict between classes. My view is a
little more uh fluid than that because I think
that it's a conflict between Coalitions of resisters and
coalitions of hierarchs, and the composition of the coalitions
changes. There's an attempt on both parties to recruit
new people to come into their coalitions to make
them more powerful. So, you can't just say it's
between uh You know, proletariats and capitalists. It's more
complicated than that. And as things change over time,
different groups participate. And one coalition is always trying
to recruit members from the other coalition or undermine
the effectiveness of the coalition. So, again, it's an
interactive, uh, kind of evolutionary process.
Mhm. So, yeah, you, you've already told us then
about the um how your theory of social change
relates to Marxism. So, uh let's now define some
terms here. So what is Hierarchy, I mean, what
does that mean?
Yeah, um, by a hierarchy, I mean a, a
kind of persisting social structure in which some individuals
have a place in that structure that gives them
power over others that others don't have over them.
So it's a, a, a structure of unequal power
relations, uh, hierarchy, and usually it has a kind
of, uh, of step-like structure so that uh the
people at the highest level uh can give direction
and control over the next level down, and those
people have some power over the next level down
from there. So it's a kind of a series
of nested power relations. Usually, that's the way it
works. And you can think about You know, a
federal system like uh the United States or uh
many other countries where there's a kind of structure
of authority and at the top is the central
government, and then there are various provinces or states
or regions, and there are people in power there
that have power over localities within their province. Uh,
AND so we come to the county level, the
city level, etc. So that's the kind of, uh,
structure I'm talking about. Now, there are political hierarchies
of the kind that I just described, but there
are also, uh, hierarchies in, uh, personal relationships. For
example, in traditional, uh, marriages in the West, there's
a kind of hierarchy of authority. So the husband
has authority over the wife that the wife doesn't
have over the husband. I'm interested mainly in the
more inclusive, larger hierarchies which are political, uh, and
resistance to those, but the notion of hierarchy is
much broader than that in general,
right? And what is domination?
Well, there's a, uh, there are different competing philosophical
theories about domination. Uh, Philip Pettit, uh, following the
classical, uh, Republican tradition, thinks of domination as the
power of some human individuals, either as individuals or
in groups. To arbitrarily interfere with the activities of
someone else. Now, I, I view domination more broadly.
I think you could be dominated not just by
particular individuals, but by social structures. And you can
also actually be dominated by your own ideological beliefs,
that is, your beliefs can interfere with your thinking
clearly about your situation, with your recognizing what's truly
in your interest, etc. So, I have a broader
notion of domination, but I'm mainly concerned with the
kind of domination exercised by people in The higher
strata of hierarchies, the, the people at the top
hierarchies, and how they have the power to interfere
arbitrarily, that is without good moral reason. In the
lives of people who are lower down in the
hierarchy than they are. So that, now, I, I
use the term domination very broadly in the book
and I say this explicitly that I'm really concerned
with the whole range of negative uh uses of
hierarchical power, exploitation, uh, domination, uh, uh. There are
other, uh, other kinds of abuses of the hierarchy.
I'm, I'm concerned gen generally with abuses of hierarchical
power and strategies of resistance to those abuses. So,
I'm not just focusing on domination in itself. I'd
use the term domination broadly as a covering term
for other, other kinds of abuses of hierarchical power,
including uh exploitation.
So let's get into the the morality aspect here.
Why is it that both parties to the struggle
in this particular case you talk about the hierarchs
and the resisters strategically deploy moral concepts? I mean,
what's. The function of that,
that's the crucial question. Uh, I mean, you might
think, look, if there's a struggle between hierarchs and
resisters, uh, they'll just, uh, each party will just
organize themselves by appealing to the self-interest of their
group, right? Why should morality have anything to do
with it? Well, I think the idea is that
the reason that human beings are such good cooperators
that they're Uh, have larger cooperative schemes and more
flexible kinds of cooperation than any other. Living things
on the planet is that they're able to achieve
cooperation by appealing to moral norms. This is important
because an obstacle to cooperation and to forming any
kind of coalition for cooperation is the self-interest of
the individuals. Like there may be something that we're
all supposed to do for the sake of cooperation.
But any particular individual may have some incentives to
defect from that scheme of cooperation. Uh, THE classic
example in game theory is called the stag hunt.
The idea is that, uh, two or more people
are cooperating to try to capture a, a deer
or a stag of some kind to, to eat
it. And there's a division of roles so that,
you know, you're supposed to stand over here and
try to direct the, the, the stag when it's
running toward the person who's going to kill or
capture it. And somebody else is supposed to do
the killing and capturing. Well, suppose I'm sitting there
waiting for the stag, and I see a rabbit
come by. And I can get the rabbit just
like this, and I can have it for myself.
Well, if I do that, if I defect from
playing my proper role, then this thwarts the cooperation
of, of getting the stag. So, the, the, the
short-term interests of individuals can give them incentives to
defect from their commitment to a cooperative scheme. One
of the things that morality does is to say,
no, no, you shouldn't do that. You promised that
you would be here. This bag, you made a,
a commitment, and you are obligated to honor that
commitment. And then you can enlist both the force
of conscience and also uh sanctions by the community
for the violation of moral rules, including rules about
promise keeping. So the idea is that one of
the reasons that humans are so good at cooperation
is that their cooperation is morally structured. And if
you, if you think of forming a coalition either
as to resist or to reinforce hierarchy, those are
forms of cooperation. And so you get better cooperation,
you are better at recruiting people for your coalition
and keeping them sustained in their participation in it,
if you can make a moral appeal, not just
an appeal to self-interest. Now, here's the second step
in the argument, and that is that Moral appeals
are more effective if they're embedded in an ideology,
that is, they're supported by a web of other
beliefs about, in this case, about the proper uses
of power, of hierarchical power. So this then becomes
a competition that has a moral aspect, but the
moral aspect is embedded in ideology. So there are
competing ideologies and The ideologies are used by each
group to try to recruit and support coalitions and
to achieve collective action on the part of the
coalitions. And they evolved in relationship to each other.
I mean, there was a, a capital, early capitalist
ideology, and then there was a leftist, Marxist ideology
which attacked it, and the capitalist ideology modified itself
to try to respond, and then the leftist ideology
changes. So, there's a competition among ideologies, but it's
all based on the need to form effective coalitions,
either coalitions of resisters or coalitions of hierarchs.
And so there is an ideology,
these ideologies generate new moral concepts, new moral ideas,
right, but then there's a sort of co-evolution between
the opposing moralized strategies, correct?
That, that's right. Right. Now, interesting thing about the
term evolution. Evolution doesn't mean progress, right? When we
talk about the evolution of the biological species, it's
a mistake to say that the present-day chicken is
a better chicken than the earlier chickens. Uh, BETTER
here just means more reproductively fit, able to pass
on, on more genes, and that depends on the
environment. So what's a, a, a good version of
the chicken, chicken 2.0, uh, in one environment, maybe
a bad one if the, if the standpoint of
rebirth of fitness, if the environment changes. So similarly,
if you say that there's a co-evolutionary process between
Hierarchs and resistors that doesn't tell you that it's
going to end in things getting better, that things
are gonna get better, and that's just a, a,
a different question. But the question is, can you
identify some patterns over the history of this struggle.
Where The interaction actually has been morally progressive. It's
produced some good results. Can you identify those patterns,
and then if you have that knowledge, can that
help you steer future social changes, uh, in a,
in a better direction. So if you find out
that there are some especially effective strategies for resistors
that have worked in the past. And you still
have a problem of dominating hierarchies, then the question
is, can you apply that knowledge about what's worked
in the past to limit their power to help
solve contemporary problems about the abuses of hierarchical power?
So there's something that I think you haven't addressed
there yet. How is it that ideologies make moral
appeals more effective?
Yeah, I think um they do it by um
supporting the moral appeals with a web of beliefs.
The example I, I think I give in the
book is, suppose that um somebody just has a
kind of instinctive negative reaction toward abortion. They just
say, abortion's wrong, we shouldn't allow it. Uh, AND
then, uh, somebody questions that. Uh, WELL, if the
person had an ideology which placed abortion in a
larger framework, for example, a Catholic, uh, ideology about
the proper function of sexuality and of rep of
reproduction, uh, that sex should be for the sake
of reproduction and that, uh, insoulment begins very early.
Then they would have a, a, a set of
reasons for their belief that abortion is wrong. And
if they, that belief was challenged, they'd be better
able to sustain that belief in the face of
criticism if they had this web of supporting beliefs,
if it made sense in a larger kind of
picture about moral principles. So I think that's one
reason why um Moral appeals that are invoked to
try to form and sustained coalitions in this struggle
are more effective if they're not just freestanding and
without support, but instead, if they're supported by a
larger web of beliefs. And the thing about ideologies
and the beliefs they contain is That they have
what I call uh belief immune systems. That is,
they have mechanisms for sustaining those beliefs in the
face of contrary evidence. Uh, I'll give you an
example from my own life. I grew up in
an apartheid society in, in Little Rock, Arkansas. It
was literally apartheid, institutionalized racism, top to bottom. And
I was brought up as a racist, as a
white, white kid. And I was uh told one
of my ideological beliefs was that Black people are
of inferior intelligence. Well, we had a housemaid, Louise,
who was a Black person. She was very intelligent.
So one day, I think I was about 7
or 8 years old, I say to my mother,
look, uh, These people are supposed to be not
very smart. Louise is one of them. She's very
smart. How can that be? Do you know what
my mother's answer was? She had a belief immune
system in her ideology, racist ideology, which enabled her
to reconcile the obvious intelligence of Louise with this
general belief about the inferior intelligous. She said, Louise
must have some white blood. So she had some
white blood and that countered the general tendency of
black people supposedly. This is an example of how
ideologies include these cognitive dissonance resolution mechanisms that enable
to sustain beliefs when they're challenged. Uh, AND that's
one of the things that makes ideology so motivationally
effective, and it protects the moral element from challenges
and dissent.
Right. So earlier I asked you about the co-evolution
between the opposing moralized strategies of hierarchs on the
one side and uh resisters on the other. So,
uh, could you explain also how the sort of
co-evolutionary dynamics also acts as a driver for the
evolution of morality more broadly and of institutions.
Yeah, I think, I think it's An exaggeration to
say it derives the evolution of morality generally. It
derives a particular part of political morality, uh, the
part that has to do with the, the way
you rightfully gain power and rightfully exercise power. So
it's, it's more limited in that way. But, uh,
for example, uh, hierarchs, uh, in, in, say, Europe
in, in the Middle Ages used to justify their
authority by saying that. Uh, THEY were, uh, appointed
by God, the divine right of, of kings sort
of theory. Uh, OR, uh, they also, uh, perhaps
had the, uh, uh, an ideological, uh, take on
why they should have authority that they were providing
a service of security and protection for their people
in exchange for people giving them a certain amount
of the social surplus. Now, uh, at a certain
point, uh, you know, beginning early in the Enlightenment
period, uh, the theological justification, the divine right of
king's view, no longer is, is, as convincing to
as many people. And people begin to think that
whether a monarchy is justified or not depends upon
how well the monarch is serving the people. All
of the people eventually, not just the property classes,
the elites. And so there's a shift, and you
get this in, there was a, a, a British,
uh, philosopher named Filmer, and he wrote a book,
uh, on patriarchy, which he claimed that he was
trying to support the divine right of theory of
King's view, and he claimed that contemporary monarchs were
the descendants of Adam. And that they were, there
was this lineage, this pedigree that gave them the
authority that they had, and John Locke, the philosopher,
wrote in his, uh, first, uh, treatise of government,
uh, a blow by blow refutation of, uh, Filmer's
version of the divine right theory, and, uh, Locke
won. He clearly won, and he didn't win because
he Immediately changed everybody's mind. There were already changes
going on in the culture that were making the
divine right ideology less plausible to more people. So
then you get in Locke this idea that uh
The government, the rulers are really just the fiduciary
agents of the people. They serve at the will
of the people and only are legitimate if the
people consent to their rule. And this sets up
a completely different framework for understanding resistance to hierarchies
and for justifying revolution, because now, Uh, accept this
new ideology, revolution to be justified whenever the people
decide they don't want this set of people to
be their agent. Uh, AND they don't have to
prove that they've been abusing their power. They don't
have to show that there's been violation of a
contract in that sense. It's just completely up to
them. They're totally in charge. The rulers have no
independent rights whatsoever. They only have the rights that
are conferred by their being designated as the agent.
This is a radical change. In how authority is
conceived and how resistance to authority, including a revolution,
uh, is, is conceived. Uh, SO, uh, those are
the kinds of changes that I'm talking about and,
uh, often the changes come about in a completely
unintended way. I mean, if you think about, uh,
what happened in 1215 in England, at, at Runnymede
where The barons of England gang up on King
John and force him to sign the Magna Carta.
Now, The barons don't have any interest in protecting
the rights of the common people. They're worried about
the encroachment of King John on their rights and
privileges. So what they want to do is constrain
the monarch for their sake. But they do this
by issuing a document that says the king is
not above the law. Now This is the beginning
of the idea that nobody is above the law
and that the law should apply equally to everyone.
It's the beginning of the idea of the rule
of law and equality before the law. The Magna
Carta also includes a clause saying that there should
be a council of notables of higher aristocrats who
are supposed to advise and constrain the king. This
is the seed from which parliament grew. Now, when
the rule of law develops to encompass everybody, the
commoners, as well as the elites, and when you
begin to get representative institutions, you have a power
shift, which actually takes power away from the people
who originated this process, the barons who were trying
to constrain. Uh, THE king. They had no idea
that this was going to happen. It wasn't their
intention. They didn't desire any such thing. Similarly, John
Locke, you know, Locke does the second treatises of
government and gives an argument for revolution against an,
an overweening monarch, and he invokes the idea of
natural rights, that, you know, the government is violating
natural rights. Now, Locke is a member of an
elite. He's a white male. He actually is a
shareholder in a slave company, the Royal Africa Company,
right? But this idea of natural rights that he
uses for the sake of the privileges and interests
of his class, vis a vis the monarchy, later
is taken up by abolitionists, and after that, by
feminists, and put to uses that are completely contrary
to the interest of people like Locke, who first
invoked the ideas. So this happens over and over
again, this kind of backfire, uh, uh, mechanism, uh,
that can contribute to, to moral progress.
So as we've talked about this struggle between hierarchs
and resisters is obviously uh political. It's also moral.
Can it also be epistemic in nature? And if
so, in what ways?
Yes, I think this is really important. I think
that theories of social change often don't, uh, Give
sufficient credit to epistemic improvements, improvements in the social
environment in which we form beliefs and gain knowledge.
Let me give you an example from the struggle
between hierarchy and resisters. Uh, SUPPOSE at a certain
point, you're say, looking at the history of England,
uh, and you, you see that, uh, uh, There's
been a, a movement that's exerted pressure on parliament,
and eventually, parliament has responded by uh recognizing a
right to freedom of expression and freedom of association.
For example, the right to form unions, which were
illegal for many, many decades. OK. Now, that's a,
an accommodation, a concession that the people in power
make to the demands for freedom of expression, freedom
of association. And When this happens, then People are
able to meet together, exchange views, develop their views
about the rightful use of power. And they may
then, on the basis of that knowledge and that
coordination of their beliefs that they could only achieve
because they had a right to freedom of expression
and the rights of association, they make further political
demands, like the extension of, of the right to
vote. OK, they're able because they have gotten this
first gain, which improves their social epistemic environment, which
improves their uh opportunities for learning together how best
to pursue their interest against the resisters. They're able
then to make new political demands and get new
rights like the right for, you know, to vote
for larger numbers of people. So, part of what
goes on in the struggle is that There's an
effort by the hierarchies to restrict the social epistemic
environment in a way that disempowers potential resisters, right?
If you can restrict freedom of expression, prevent the
formation of unions and other forms of political association,
that's gonna handicap the people who are trying to
resist you. So, when the resistors succeed in making
certain political demands, it has the effect often of
improving the social epistemic environment, which enables them to
go on and make further kinds of gains. So,
there's, there's a sense in which it's also a
struggle about who's going to control the social epistemic
environment, the environment in which people can come to
recognize what their interests are, uh, mobilize effectively, develop
strategies. Uh, CONVERGE on strategies, uh, uh, like agreement
on. So it's really a struggle about that as
well. And, uh, uh, 11 dimension the struggle takes
is getting the right to education for people, right?
I mean, well, if you can keep people benighted,
uh, illiterate, it's very hard for them to organize,
uh, and, uh, so if, if you, if you
see the struggle as including either by intention or,
or just as a matter of unintended consequences. A
struggle over who's gonna control the, the, the environment
in which we learn how to operate effectively in
politics. Then that gives you a whole, a whole
new dimension to it. Uh, AND, uh, in, in,
in general, it's in the interest of, uh, dominating
hierarchies to have a defective social epistemic environment. Uh,
BECAUSE a better social epistemic environment is going to
provide resources for people to resist them better.
So, let's get into one of the main topics
of your book. Let's talk about revolution. So, first
of all, what is revolution? How do you define
it?
You know, uh, when I started studying this, I
had no idea how the term had undergone a
change. Originally, a revolution meant a kind of return
to a starting point. Now, that's not what we
mean by revolution at all. No, I mean, there
was these, there were these views in ancient Greece
and Rome of cyclical periods, right? Where you might
have a democracy and then it would degenerate and
come back to a kingship, sort of over and
over again. Revolution in the way that a wheel
revolves, right? That was the original. But then, uh,
later in, in the, in the 1600s, maybe, maybe
a little earlier, a revolution comes to be thought
of as a fundamental change in the type of
government brought about not through uh Law-like processes, but
by some extralegal and often violent process. So, a
fundamental change in the type of government. Now, it's
interesting that there's a debate among scholars about whether
the so-called American Revolution was really a revolution or
not, because in some ways, it was just an
extrapolation of political developments that have been going on
in the UK since Magna Carta, right? The growing
power of the parliament and the diminishing power of
the monarch. Well, the Americans just took it to
the last step. They got rid of the monarch,
right? But otherwise, they, they incorporated a lot of
the features of the, of the English political legal
system. So, there's one group that says that now,
it's not really an American revolution, it's not that
profound. And there are other people, oh no, it
really was. Uh, uh, A, a change in the
fundamental, a fundamental change in the type of government,
but then you have to get down and say,
well, what counts as a fundamental change? And uh,
so I've sides of that debate. I've looked at
cases where everybody would agree it's a revolution, the
French Revolution, the Bolshevik Revolution, uh, the Chinese, uh,
Maoist revolution, uh, and then I've, I've asked the
question, well, Under what circumstances are revolutions likely to
produce morally progressive results? I mean, we have some
pretty bad results from the major revolutions. And so
the question is, what role should revolution play in
a theory of progressive moral change? And how do
you explain the radical difference in outcomes between, say,
the American Revolution, if you call it that, or
the English Revolution of 1688 on the one hand.
And the outcome of the French Revolution and the
Bolshevik Revolution on the other. And I have a
theory about this. I have a theory that What
largely determines the outcome of a revolution is the
context in which the revolution occurs. And in particular,
I distinguish between two really different contexts. One I
call the Lockian context and the other, the Hobbesian
context. Now, the Lockian context, you have civil society
organizations and you have people who have learned how
to cooperate in a peaceful, consensus-based way, and you've
had leaders who've emerged in these civil society organizations.
So there's something to work with when a revolution
occurs. On the other hand, if you have a
really ruthless dictatorship, it's prevented civil society from existing.
It doesn't allow any private organizations unless it totally
controls them. And so there's nobody there who has
any experience in government. And no experience in building
consensus peacefully, persuading people. There's no basis for the
kind of trust that you need. And what happens
in the hobbying context is that the revolution starts,
there are two struggles that the, the people who
want to make the revolution have to, to engage
in. They've got to get enough people to participate.
And they don't have any institutions by which they
can persuade people to participate, and they often use
coercion to get people to participate. They try to
make it more costly for you to sit out
the revolution or be on the side of the
regime than to participate. They even use terrorism against
their own people to do this. The other problem
they have to solve is leadership. You need somebody
to organize the revolutionary effort, and if there are
no Uh, institutions and no traditions of peacefully selecting
leaders. There's often a bloody and violent competition to
see who's going to lead the revolution. Now, in
those circumstances, the sort of Hobbesians, where there are
no supporting non-governmental institutions that can help solve the
participation and the leadership problem, you end up having
a kind of uh uh ruthless competition, uh, and
the people who end up uh successfully leading the,
the competition, uh, leading the revolution have already developed
habits of, of ruthlessness and brutality and top-down. Exertion
of authority. And they don't just magically give those
up the minute they, they, uh, win the revolutionary
struggle. On the other hand, if you take like
the American Revolution. There were colonial legislatures in all
of the 13 colonies that have been in operation
for over 100 years. And They had developed a
culture of democratic consensual decision-making. Leaders had emerged. There
was a lot of social capital in the form
of trust. And then there was the Continental Congress,
which operated, uh, immediately before the, the, the fighting
started and, and through the revolution. And so they
had resources for solving the problem of getting enough
people to participate and solving leadership problem without top-down
brutal coercion. And I think this made a difference
in the outcome. Of the American Revolution, uh, and
why you can see it went in a different
direction from these revolutions where they didn't have those
social resources. Uh, SO, uh, and, and this has
kind of a paradoxical implication, namely, where you lead,
where you need revolution the most, where the regime
is the most oppressive, you're less likely to get
good results from a revolution. That's not a happy
conclusion for me to draw, right? Uh, YOU know,
uh, 00, by the way, there's a lesson here
about the Iranian Revolution in 1979. The Shah had
pretty much destroyed all civil society organizations except the
network of madrassas and mosques, the, the clergy-led, uh,
organizations. And so when the Shah was toppled, the
only people in a position. To take control of
the revolution were the Muslim clerics, and they happen
to be extremely fundamentalist and one of the theocracy.
And so that, that's a case where you had
almost a totally Hobbscene situation. You had nothing going
on in civil society that could be a resource
for a relatively peaceful revolutionary transition, but you did
have one group that was intact. And because they
were the only group intact, they were able to
take control and we're seeing the results of that
now. Mhm.
You know, it's very interesting, while you were talking,
something that came to my mind and in the,
in the meanwhile, I looked it up because I
didn't, I, I didn't have it memorized, but are
you familiar with Eric Chenoev's work on revolutions and
when they are successful or not?
Um, I'm not sure. I thought I had read
when was this book published? How, uh,
I'm, I'm not talking about the specific book. I'm,
uh, she, she's a sociologist if I remember correctly,
and she does work. I, I know that she
has a book published. I can't remember the exact
title now, but I, I, I mean, I'm, I'm
just going to
go through, say, say her name again. Say her
name again.
Erica Chenoweth.
I'm, I'm, uh, Embarrassed that I'm not familiar with
it. Uh,
NO, no, no, no, it's not a problem at
all. I, I mean, I, I'm going, I'm just
going through, I'm going to go through some of
the, what she identified as the key factors for
success, and perhaps you can tell me what you
think about them and if they sort of uh
correspond to. Some of the ideas you already have,
so she says that, uh, one of the key
factors is mass mobilization and momentum. So movements must
achieve a high level of broad and diverse participation
from across society, and, uh,
she says that that this means, uh. Inclusive efforts
to to build a coalition right appeal to the
interest of broader sections of the population to get
a critical mass. So I'm, I'm right, yeah.
Uh, RIGHT, and I, I think if I remember
correctly, I think that she says that usually around
3% of the population is enough to conduct a
revolution. So, uh, and then she also points to
the factions from pillars of support, and that includes
people. Like the military, the police, economic elites, which
basically weakens the autocrats' power, uh, and then she
also talks about resilience and backfire, that is movements
must withstand escalating state repression by maintaining discipline and
turning violent acts by the regime against itself. Making
the repression seem unjust and turning public opinion against
against the government, uh, and then she also refers
to uh tactical innovation, I mean strategic innovation in
nonviolent tactics such as strikes and civil disobedience, so
I mean what do you think about that?
Uh, uh, I agree with all of this, and
by the way, it's, it, it's similar to a
book that I do talk about a little bit
in the, in, in, in my book, um, that
Tries to uh also give an account of uh
when revolutions succeed and where, when revolutionary leaderships maintain
power through the revolution and after the revolution, and
they name the same kinds of factors. Uh, NOW,
on this thing about resilience, um, uh, I think
it's important to focus on the fact that any
revolutionary movement is going to have setbacks. And the
question is, can it continue and keep its sufficient
level of support even if it has setbacks? And
I think this is one place where, um, there
are two factors that distinguish the revolutions that succeed
in, in, uh, surviving setbacks. One is that they
have to have a highly disciplined leadership. Uh, uh,
AND, and, and the Marxist, the Leninist ideology is
that you have to have a core group of
professional revolutionaries subject to rigid party discipline who will
continue no matter what happens. The other factor is
You need an ideology which will explain away your
failures. Right. And in the case of the French
Revolution, when the French army first goes on a,
a, a, a mission of conquest, they first uh
invade Austria, and they have terrible setbacks. They're defeated
in the first battles. Well, the, the revolutionary leadership
in Paris says, oh, it's not because we gave
them bad instructions. It's not because, you know, we
did anything wrong. It's the foreign aristocrat plot. There
were traitors among our generals. That's why we failed,
OK. And similarly, when uh the economic policies uh
of uh expropriating grain from the countryside in, in
Russia, To feed the industrial workers, uh, fail to
increase productivity. The explanation is klas, rich peasants who
are really bourgeoisie or undermining the efforts or wreckers,
that, you know, hidden bourgeois counterrevolutionaries. These ideologies always
invoke some kind of mechanism to try to insulate
the leadership from people recognizing their failures. That's, that's
really, I think, a crucial element of, of what
goes on. But, no, I agree with, uh, and,
and these items that she mentions as the determining
factors in whether refers succeed or not, they're, they're
fairly widely endorsed. I mean, in the, the, uh,
other books that I've read, say a, a, a
similar, uh, tell a similar kind of story about
why some revolutions succeed and some fail. Now, a
factor that she didn't mention. That I think is
important in some revolutions is whether there is third
party support or opposition. For the revolutionaries, right, uh,
and, uh, in, in the, in the case of
the American Revolution, there was tremendous support by France.
France sent, sent, uh, uh, many soldiers and lots
of munitions and war supplies, uh, to the, to
the, uh, rebelling Americans, uh, to fight against the
British. And I don't think that. The Americans would
have won the Revolutionary War, uh, or it would
have taken them maybe another 10 years to win
it without French support. There was also Spanish support.
The, the French were out in the, in the
open about their support. The, the Spanish found it,
uh, advisable to do it covertly. Uh, THEY set
up shell merchant, uh, Uh, companies, uh, and, but
they, uh, they transported a tremendous amount of military
supplies to the Americans, uh, uh, covertly during the
revolution. So, uh, the American Revolution wasn't just, uh,
a matter of the Americans in a self-sufficient way
defeating the British. They had tremendous help from, uh,
from Spain and from England, uh, from Spain and
France. Yeah.
And what do you make of When, for example,
has happened in the French Revolution, uh, after the
revolution there was a period called the reign of
terror, and so I mean sometimes it happens that
in revolutions and particularly when they're headed by particular
people who tend to have certain paranoid tendencies and
so want to purge everyone internally and externally. They
might deem to be enemies of the new regime
or the revolution. I mean, when something like that
happens, do you deem that to be a failed
revolution, or not? Uh,
BOY, that's, that's a really good question. I mean,
the, the, the terror in the French Revolution, the,
the, the terror was, uh, uh, about 18 months,
uh, 1793, 1794, uh, and, uh. So some people
who, who just focus on that say the French
Revolution was a failure. Um. I think it's hard
to make. Overall judgments about whether a revolution was
a failure or success. Um, THEY could be successful
in some ways and not in others. One way
the French Revolution was successful was that it undermined
hereditary privilege. Uh, AND it separated two kinds of
power that the, uh, the nobility had in the
past. They had property rights, but they also had
ruling rights. If you were the lord of an
estate. You not only owned the property and could
extract uh surplus value from your peasants, but you
were the magistrate, you were the judge who you
had a government power and a private property power.
The French Revolution separated those. The government power all
went to the centralized state. And the private property
was left intact, and the inequality of the private
property system was not significantly changed by the French
Revolution. The property owning of the church was destroyed,
but the church lands were generally then bought by
people who are already wealthy. In fact, there's some
evidence that, uh, economic inequality increased after the revolution.
Rather than decrease. So if you're concerned about arbitrary
inequal economic inequalities, the French Revolution was a failure
on that. If you were concerned about the idea
of careers open to talent and abolishing hereditary privilege,
it was a success. To a large extent Uh,
so I think, you know, you, you have to
make a more fine-grained judgment, um, but, uh, you,
you mentioned this sort of paranoid tendency in the
terror. Well, that happened not just in the French
Revolution but also in, uh, uh, the Bolshevik revolution
and in the Stalinist regime that followed the revolution.
Uh, Stalin just basically destroyed anybody who he thought
might possibly be an enemy. Uh, NOW, you've got
to realize that this wasn't entirely paranoid because Stalin
grew up in the context of the Bolshevik Party,
which was this completely ruthless professional revolutionary group led
by Lenin. And all the people around him were
quite ready to murder him if they thought they
could gain power by doing it. The, the sense
in which he wasn't paranoid, but it was because
of the particular culture of the Bolshevik Party. Uh,
ANY sign of weakness on the part of the
leader would mean people would form some coalition and
step forward and try to topple him. So, he
just acted preemptively. He destroyed anybody that he thought
might possibly mobilize against him at some point. Uh,
AND this meant killing his old friends and comrades.
He, he wiped out the old Bolsheviks, the people
that had with him had created the revolution and
put him in power. Uh, REALLY quite incredible.
And I mean, what, uh, what kind of distinction
can we establish between democratic and fascist revolutions?
Uh, WELL, you know, it's interesting. I, I say
that I'm not gonna talk about fascist revolutions because
I'm concerned about the potential of revolutions to be
morally progressive. I think that fascist revolutions by their
very nature are, are not likely to be progressive
except maybe in some unintended consequence way. Um, BUT,
uh, uh, fascist revolutions are, um, Anti-democratic, so far
as the, the fascist ideology includes the leadership principle,
that is that there has to be, you know,
in the Italian case of the Duce or in
the German case, the, the Fuhrer, uh, somebody who
has absolute power, some individual who has absolute power,
and there's a, there's a sort of cult of
personality, uh, theory about the virtues of the leader.
That's the stinctive of fascism. Fascism also, uh, as
far as I know, most scholars of fascism say
fascism has a central element of racism or racial
inequality, racial hierarchy. Uh, AND of course, democratic revolutions
are, are in principle aimed at a more inclusive
view about who matters. Uh, THEY deny fundamental, uh,
natural differences in, in status among individuals. Uh. So
I think uh Now, interesting about fascist revolutions, you
know, in the United States now, there's this tremendous
political division between people on the extreme left and
extreme right. And uh many people on the extreme
right think that there's a, a, a really robust
danger of a communist or socialist revolution in the
United States. Now I think there's a risk of
a revolution, but I don't think there's a risk
of a, I think there's more of a risk
of a fascist. Uh, REVOLUTION. And one reason there
is that, if you think about what it would
take, well, first of all, there has never been
a successful communist revolution in an advanced industrial country.
They've been basically peasant revolutions, OK. So that makes
it improbable that there would be a communist revolution.
And one reason that communist revolutions don't occur in
advanced capitalist society is that there are entrenched institutions,
including the Constitution, property rights systems, and a huge
amount of power in the form of the people
who have the most wealth in the capitalist economy.
And it's very hard to, to overcome that. With
fascism, you don't have to do that. You don't
have to destroy the capitalist system. Instead, you co-opt
the capitalists. I mean, what, what the, uh, uh,
what the Nazis did was they promised the capitalists
that they would uh protect them against the communist
revolution, against the Bolshevik, uh, Jewish conspiracy. And that
they would be able to maintain their power so
long as they cooperated with the, the leader. The,
the, so, it's much easier. For a fascist revolution
to occur in a, in an advanced capitalist country
because they don't have to overthrow capitalism to do
it, right? Uh, THAT'S one reason. But also, in
the United States, there's always been a sort of,
uh, element of Authoritarian pop populism that's been a,
a, a kind of continuity, and there was a
strong Nazi Party in the American, uh, in American
society until uh the US entered World War II.
There were large rallies, Nazi rallies in Madison Square
Garden and elsewhere, and there were key, uh, public
figures like Charles Lindbergh, the famous aviator, who were
very sympathetic to the Nazis in Germany. Um, ALSO,
you got to realize that At the time of
between the two wars, about 20% of the American
population was of German descent. And, uh, many of
them were quite sympathetic to what was going on
in Germany. Uh, I think that this is sort
of a, a bit of a regression but a
briefing. I think that Franklin Delano Roosevelt with his
New Deal, his Institution of a sort of a
minimal welfare state in the United States. AVERTED a
fascist revolution. In the 1930s, there were fascist revolution,
anti-democratic revolutions going on everywhere. It looked like democracy
was on its way out. And I think it
could have, as a result of people perceiving that
democracies hadn't dealt with the Great Depression, right? They
hadn't solved the economic problem. And I think that
there was a lot of sentiment like that in
the United States, and I think that by producing
these welfare programs and pulling the country out of
the Great Depression, uh, What Roosevelt did was to
undercut the, the, uh Potential for a fascist revolution.
I think it's exactly what Bismarck did, you know,
Bismarck instituted the German welfare state, not because he
cared about the common people, but because he thought
it would avoid a socialist revolution. And he was
right. So, so I think, uh, you know, if
you talk about, I don't think a revolution is
very likely in the United States of any kind.
But if I had to bet which was more
likely, I certainly wouldn't bet on a socialist or
communist revolution, not, not in a country with the
disparity of income that we have and the political
power that goes with it. I mean, Elon Musk
is worth $400 billion. Mhm.
It's insane. It's completely insane.
Yeah, it's, well, and, uh, in major US corporations,
the CEO has a rate of composition that's over
300 times higher than that of the average workers,
and those enormous disparities of wealth translate into disparities
of political power. Yeah, and it's very hard to
overthrow that political power.
Right. And you also haven't had the Communist Party
in the US for a very long time,
right? Well, you know, one of the results of
the Cold War was that it destroyed the left-wing
presence in American labor. American Labor is the most
conservative labor group in the world, as far as
I know. Uh, IN, in the Cold War, the
struggle against the Soviet Union resulted in purging. Uh,
FROM every part of society, anybody on the left,
I mean, anybody was viewed as, you know, a,
a fellow traveler of the Soviet communists if they
had the mildest social democratic ideas. Uh, AND, uh,
so that's, you know, we're, we're living with the
consequences of the Cold War today. I mean, the
US quote, won the Cold War, but at a
price of, uh, really debilitating its, uh, domestic politics
from uh seriously considering anything like social democracy of
the kind that you have in Europe.
Yeah, you, you know, here, here in Portugal, we
still have a Communist Party that is a very
old party over 100 years old, and they participated
during the, uh, right-wing dictatorship that ran from 1932
up to 1974 here in Portugal. They participated in
resistance against the regime and they They were jailed
and politically persecuted and then they also helped with
the revolution in 1974, but I mean nowadays they
are pretty much a reformist party. I mean they,
they pretty much want to work within capitalism and
just reform things like improving uh working conditions, increasing
the minimum wage, more social. Benefits improving the education
system, the healthcare system. I mean, the most extreme
view that they have, I think, is that they
think we should leave the European Union, but apart
from that,
yeah, no, this has happened in many, many communist
parties, I think. I mean, the, the, the, the
strategy of the, of the bourgeoisie of creating a
welfare state that just Uh, generous enough to, uh,
prevent people from becoming revolutionaries, but not generous enough
to change the basic power structure. This has been
a brilliant success, and then it means that, uh,
parties that previously might have been revolutionaries become reformists,
you know, as you're saying, and, uh, yeah, uh.
But if, you know, if Marx is right, there
are the, the most fundamental Negative features of capitalism
cannot be reformed away. Uh, AS long as you
have, uh, employer monopoly, you have people who have
Control over the means of production and can dictate
the terms and unfair bargains of who works for
them, you're going to have exploitation and domination and
that, according to the Marxist view, that's an inherent,
not a contingent feature of the capitalist system. And
the only way you can get rid of that
is by getting rid of the capitalist system. And
I think there are very few people who, who
are willing to take the risks of an unpredictable
outcome of a revolution. Uh, IF they're, you know,
doing well enough in the, in the capital system.
Uh, AND, and the capitalist system has other kinds
of mechanisms. I mean, the whole consumer culture and,
uh, advertising, uh, diverts people's attention from the flaws
of the political system and the economic system, and,
uh, puts them on a sort of a path
of perpetual striving for more and better things. Uh,
YOU know, and, and, uh, I think as long
as that's, uh, powerful, um, people will put up
with a lot of defects in the system. Um
Yeah, so in regards to revolutions, uh, there is
one thing I haven't asked you about yet. So,
um, when it comes to political ideologies, how can
they either facilitate or thwart revolutionary collective action?
Good, good. Um, I think that, uh, the way,
uh, the Frankfurt School and people on the left,
uh, and, and Marx himself thought about ideologies, he
thought of them as misrepresenting, uh, a system of
domination in a way that, uh, prevents people from
taking seriously the idea of overthrowing the system. So
it, it's not that it, uh, ideology in this
sense causes a collective action problem. It prevents people
from even getting to the point of seriously considering
acts that might have collective action problems. Uh, SO
I mean, if, if you have an ideology that
tells you that The inequalities in your society are
natural or inevitable or they're the result of dessert,
you know, that people have more dessert more, then
you, you're not gonna be thinking seriously about trying
to change the system. Um, ON the other hand,
you can have emancipatory or revolutionary ideologies which tell
people that. The way things have been represented is
false. The system is not working in your interest.
It's not going to work in your interest, so
it's got to be a fundamental change, and The
idea is that this kind of uh emancipatory revolutionary
ideology will motivate people in such a way that
they don't do the kind of self-interested calculations that
lead to collective action problems. I mean, the classic
collective action problem is the free-rider problem, you know,
you say, well, yeah, revolution would be a good
idea, but whether the revolution is gonna succeed or
not is not gonna depend on whether I participate.
My participation could be a cost to me. It
might even get me killed. So I'll just sit
back and see if other people do it. Another
version of the collective action problem is called the
assurance problem. I'd be willing to make the sacrifices
and run the risk of participating in rep if
I had assurance that enough other people would participate
to reach the critical threshold necessary for success, but
I don't have that assurance. Well, the thing about
Ideology, so far as they include moral commitments, especially
ideas about justice, is they tell people that you
ought to do this regardless. That is you, you,
you should have an unconditional commitment. You should, you
should do it even if you're not sure that
enough other people participate. It's a matter of your
expressing your moral identity of showing integrity. And even
if you think you could sit out the revolution,
you shouldn't sit out the revolution because this is
your revolution. This is for, for your sake, and
you are the people who have to do it.
It, it can sort of substitute the I thinking
for the we thinking, right? This is what we
ought to do. All of us. And, and so
there, there's a sense in which ideologies can either
thwart collective action or promote collective action. Uh, I,
I think of ideologies as maps that are shared
by people. They give a characterization of the landscape,
and they give guidance. They coordinate people's beliefs about
the way things are, the way things could be,
and they enable collective action by getting people to
think in terms of we rather than I.
Mm. Right, but do you think that ideology itself
can play a role, a causal role in revolution?
I mean, because as you know, I mean, we
can have perhaps a, a sort of Marxist materialist
approach to this and say, oh no, it's not
ideas or ideologies that Cause revolutions, it's the material
conditions that people live in, it's the material conditions
people respond to, or you can be perhaps an
anthropologist or a human behavioral ecologist and say, oh,
it's not ideology itself, it's the ecological, the social,
the economic, the political conditions people live in. That
lead them to uh participate in revolutions and then
ideologies are something that comes after the fact in
the sense that they are sort of post hoc
rationalizations and ways of trying to create a coherent
uh a coherent uh. Intellectualization of what we're wanting
to do there and perhaps mobilizing people and enabling
what's already going to happen anyway, so I mean,
uh, is it possible to establish whether ideologies really
do have or play a causal role in revolutions
or not?
Yeah, I think, I think that they can play
a causal role and there's good evidence that they
do because differences in ideologies correlate at least pretty
strongly with differences in The way, the way revolutions
are conducted and then the outcomes, uh, and if
you contrast the kind of ideology of the American
Revolution with the ideology of the Bolsheviks or the,
uh, or the radical French during the terror, you
can see that they're not just differences in ideologies,
but they seem to, uh, correlate very strongly with
differences in the way the revolution is conducted and
the outcomes. I don't think ideologies are Autonomously effective.
I think whether an ideology has any causal effect
depends upon uh, uh, a complex of contextual features,
uh, and that, uh, you don't wanna think of
it as, well, ideology versus interest. You, you wanna
think of ideologies as harnessing and coordinating interest and
providing justifications for pursuing interest in ways that go
against the ordinary moral rules. So it's not like
ideology or interest or ideology or material conditions. It's,
uh, if ideologies have a causal role, it's only
because there are various enabling conditions, um, alignment with
the interest, important interest and, uh, material conditions, epistemic
conditions that allow the diffusion of the ideology. Now
I think that most people writing on revolution, uh,
now. Uh, ACKNOWLEDGE that there's some causal role for
ideologies, they just disagree as to how significant the
role is or which aspects of the process or
the outcome are causally influenced by, uh, ideologies. Um,
AGAIN, I think It would be surprising if ideology
didn't have some causal role, given the way I
framed the problem, that is that the revolutionaries and
the counterrevolutionaries have to form coalitions and sustain those
coalitions and if possible, recruit people from the other
coalition into their group, right? This was the, the
author that you mentioned said this is important. They
need to get defection of some key people, military
people and others to join the revolution. Yes, if,
if that's, if that's the problem. Then you have
to ask, well, what's gonna motivate people to join
your coalition, and if you only depended on self-interest,
it might be very hard to recruit people because
you have the free rider of the insurance problem.
But if you can appeal to their moral identity,
if you can tap into their moral motivations. Then
you be more likely not just to recruit them
initially, but to keep them participating in the coalition
even when there are adverse uh problems that you
run into setbacks of the revolution. So, uh, I
think it's uh Well, uh, uh, I mean, think
about it. Both parties in a real revolutionary struggle
make ideological appeals. I mean, think about Franco, your,
in your neighboring country, in Spain, you know, uh.
I mean, you know, he, he basically said, look,
these, these socialists and communists, they want to destroy
our religion and they want to destroy our family,
and religion and family and patriotism are the most
important virtues of human beings. This was, this was
basically the simplified version of, of Franco's uh Message
and also order, right, that that these are people
who want to destroy the order. They don't know
what they're going to replace it with, and if
the order is destroyed, there will be chaos and
everybody will suffer. So the, the appeal to these
sort of patriarchal traditional values, religion, nationalism. Um, THE
family along with the claim that we'll protect you
against disorder, if that's not an ideology, I don't
know what it is, and I, I think it'd
be surprising. If Franco and his people were so
stupid that they expended a lot of resources on
pushing that message, if it had no, if they
thought it would have no effect whatsoever, and on
the other side there was a, an ideology. Now
the other side was split into different groups. There
were, you know, there were anarchists and there were
communists and others, uh, but they had some, uh,
commonalities. One commonality was that they had an ideology
of secularization. They wanted to. To destroy the political
power of the, of the Catholic Church in Spain.
Uh, SO I, I think, you know, if you're
trying to motivate people to take the risk of
involving themselves in either revolution or counterrevolution, You've got,
uh, uh, appeal to them, um, and not just
on the basis of self-interest. Uh, AND that's why
I think ideologies do, do play some role. Um,
NOW, you know, there's a, a famous book on
called, uh, The State and Social revolution by Scope
pole. And she says that uh uh two apparently
contrary things. She says, well, yes, ideologies but Play
some role, then she says, but they, they don't
really determine the outcome of the revolution. And what
she means is that the ideology can claim that
they're gonna provide equality for everybody, and then you
end up with a dictatorship in the, in the,
so that's completely compatible with everything I say about
it, about it. It's not that there will be
fidelity to all elements of the evolution of the
ideology if the revolution succeeds, but nonetheless, the ideology
can play a role in. Uh, In the success
of the revolution, along with other factors, if it
enables people to believe that they have to defer
completely to the leadership. And maintain discipline and if
it explains away the temporary setbacks and failures of
the revolutionary leadership.
Mhm. OK, so I would like to ask you
just one question that falls under the rubric of
the ethics of revolution because I mean if we
were to get now into uh an in-deep exploration
of the ethics of revolution, we could be here
for the next 3 hours, I guess. And, and
I mean, in a couple of weeks, I'm going
to interview Doctor Jeff McMahon from the University of
Oxford about the ethics of political violence. So I
guess that's some of that, I will leave for
that interview. But let me just ask you then,
what do you think is the distinction between just
and unjust revolutionary violence?
Uh. Here's the distinction I make in the book
that I think is made often enough. There are
two arenas in which revolutionary violence may, may occur.
One is in Coercing people to participate and violently
solving the leadership problem. Those two things have to
be done before there can be a revolutionary war
against the state, because a war means an organized
military effort, right? The state already has solved that
problem. It, it's already solved the, the problem of
having enough troops and having a leadership structure, but
the revolutionaries have to create that before they can
really go to war with the, the regime. Now
they can engage in acts of violence either against
the regime or against their own people to try
to get them on board, but those are two
different settings in which violence can occur. And in
the Real revolutionary War setting, I think there's, generally
speaking, the ethics of wars in general apply. Because
by that time, the revolutionary group has become more
like a state. It's already organized. It has an
army, it's a command structure, but, but in the,
in the earlier phase, I'm not sure that the
principles of just war tell us a lot about
what's right or. Wrong on the part of the
use of revolutionaries to solve, you know, the participation
of leadership problem. That's a separate, and it's very,
it's a very difficult situation because they have so
few resources at the beginning. There's such an asymmetry
of military power. Uh, AND if you look at
the actual tactics of Revolutionaries at, in, in that
arena at that early stage, uh, they often engage
in acts which you otherwise just call terrorism, right?
I mean, uh, one is what's called the propaganda
of the deed where, and, and by the way,
the best film ever made on revolution is the
Battle of Algiers, directed by Gilo Pontecorvo. It's, it's
a, it's a film that's used as a training
film by the CIA and al-Qaeda. That tells you
something about it, OK. And in it, at the
very beginning, uh, uh, a, a young man comes
up and just shoots a French policeman on the
street. Now, the people who told him to do
that are under no illusion that this is going
to make the French government change its behavior. The
audience for that act of violence is not the
French government, it's the Algerian people. IS to tell
the Algerian people we have power, we can hurt
them. Because one thing An oppressive ideology does is
deprive people of a sense of agency. That they
can change the regime. So when this guy goes
up and he shoots this policeman, he's saying, we
can hurt them. We have power. That's the beginning
of revolutionary consciousness. The other thing that revolutionaries do
is If anything, I think more morally problematic, and
that is they deliberately provoke the regime to excessive
use of force. They organize a peaceful demonstration, but
then they do something to make sure that the
government will respond with excessive force. And when this
happens, it radicalizes a lot of people because people
get the message the government doesn't care about us.
There's no limit to the brutality they'll use. There's
no alternative but revolution. So, there, there are many
strategies that successful revolutionaries use that are highly morally
problematic. Um, AND that's where the real hard work
of the ethics of revolutionary violence occurs. It's not
in this later when those problems have been solved
and you have a real revolutionary army that can
act in a state-like fashion against the, the regime,
and I, I think that, uh, it's just enorm
enormously difficult, you know, if the current regime is
horrible enough. Uh, AND the only alternative is revolution,
then you might think that some acts of revolutionary
violence are justified that otherwise would never be justified
in any other less extreme circumstances. But the problem
is, if you, uh, if you have a revolutionary
leadership that, uh, Persistently engages in these very morally
problematic acts of violence, it's a delusion to think
that once they consolidate power, they're going to quit
acting like that. They will, they will develop the
habit of violence. And also, uh, in the process
of coming to their position of power, they've made
enemies. They have to worry about those enemies trying
to overthrow them, right? They've hurt a lot of
people. And so that's another reason why they tend
to Consolidate power and use it preemptively to destroy
anybody who might be a threat, and that means,
you know, you're going to get a very nasty
regime.
Right, so, uh, I mean, I would like to
get now into the topic of moral progress. I
have a few questions I would like to ask
you about it, and then I have just two
final questions about hierarchy. So, um, We've talked actually
about moral progress in our previous conversation about your
other book, Our moral faith, but uh I would
like to ask you now, how do you respond
to challenges coming from skepticism about moral progress, namely
it being tainted by its misuses in justifying colonialism
and the truth and the truth of normative ethical
relativism.
Yeah. Um, I, I do talk about this quite
a bit in the book. Uh, uh, I think
there are Two different sources of skepticism about, or
at least two sources of skepticism about, about moral
progress discourse. One is what you said is the
tainted view is that this concept has been so
abused in justifying colonialism or in justifying brutal state
communist regimes that we just should take it off
the table. It's too dangerous, OK. Well, I'm reluctant
to agree with that because there are lots of
concepts that have been misused, but we find it's
still important to be able to use them. The,
the concept of virtue, for example, right? I mean,
in Roman times, virtue meant basically Physical courage of
males, right? In the Victorian era, virtue means the
chastity of women to a large extent, right? It's
based on a totally sexist part. So, but I
think, I still think we need the term virtue,
you know, and there's a whole virtue ethics literature
now. So I, I think the question is, can
we rehabilitate the term and dissociate it from these
abuses, and I think it's worth trying to do
that. Now, another source that you mentioned is ethical
relativism is if you think that there's no such
thing as what's right or wrong in general, but
things are only right or wrong relative to a
particular culture or moral code, then you won't be
able to talk about moral progress for humanity. You
might be able to talk about moral progress for
this group, you know, improvements relative to their moral
standards, but you can't do that. Well, uh, I
think there's some truth in In ethical relativism, I
think that people overestimate the extent of Correct moral
principles. I think there's a, there's a very small
set of moral principles that are universally valid, that
is, they're, that they are principles that anybody ought
to try to observe regardless of other differences in
their moral code. So I think there's like a
range of relativism that's quite large, but there's a
small area of non-relativism, uh, and, and, and as
long as you're talking about moral progress only, uh,
refers to that relatively small core of things like,
you know, slavery is bad, for example, then I
think you're on, you're immune to criticisms from the
ethical relativists. Um, NOW the other, the other source
of Skepticism about moral progress judgments is The fact
that Some change can be good in one dimension
or one aspect of morality, but have negative consequences
in another. And so, uh, social change is often
a mixed bag. There are positive and negatives. And
it may not be possible to sort of total
it all up and get a net score as
to whether it was an improvement or not, because
some of these different dimensions may be incommensurable. They
just, they, they're not the kinds of things you
could put on a common scale. So if you
take the plurality of values really seriously, And that
they're not all reducible to one thing, and you
realize that social change can favor some values while
not favoring others, it's very hard to make uh
moral progress judgments. Uh, YOU could say, well, uh,
the abolition of slavery in the British Empire, uh,
was an improvement in that situation. But then you
have to ask, well, what else was going on?
Here, here's another example, OK. I think there's been
an improvement in attitudes toward non-human animals in this
sense. You don't have public cat burnings in Paris
anymore, which they used to have in the 16th
century, right? And you don't have public displays of
excruciatingly cruel punishment for criminals in the way that
you used to, to have. You know, you don't
draw on a quarter of people or break them
on the wheel or That kind of thing. Uh,
BUT take the case of animals. OK, we don't
have public cat burnings and, uh, dog fights and,
and, uh, cockfights are, uh, illegal in many places.
But you have massive suffering through factory farming. We're
probably hurting more animals now. Causing more animal suffering
than we ever have. Uh, AND so,
uh, well, let, let me just tell you, uh,
it's a very, I, I would say unfortunate thing,
but for example, here in Portugal, uh, and in
Spain as well in the south of France, we
still have, uh, bullfighting.
So yeah. Yeah, I, I am not a fan
of bullfighting. I mean, I, I just, I can't
see that. The justification for it, but I think
the overall tendency is to reduce the regions of
where that's done, uh, yeah, but at the same
time, uh, We have Millions of animals raised in
factory farms under really horrible conditions. So can you
say, oh, there's been progress in the treatment of
non-human animals? The answer is yes and no. It's
not just yes or, or no. And I think
this is true in many cases. So I think
that, uh, if you admit a plurality of values
and that social changes can have different effects for
different values, it's very hard to make. Uh Moral
progress judgments that are sort of uh conclusory or
summing up uh judgments about net progress or not.
Uh, BUT I also think that you can make
judgments about regression. I think that, you know, we
may have made progress in a certain area and
then we fall back in that particular area. And
in, in the, our moral faith book and in
this book, I, when I talk about regression, I
typically think about cases where Uh, there's either a
reversion to harsher economic conditions like a world depression,
or there are, uh, demagogues who convince people that
there's some terrible threat from some other group like
immigrants. But I don't think those are the only
sources of regression because in the United States right
now, I think the major cause of regression is
backlash against moral progress. Mm, uh, things that you
and I would consider to be instances of moral
progress in the United States like civil rights for
African-Americans, more equal rights for women and gay people.
These are not viewed as good things by many
people because they create losers. People lose status and
privilege when those forms of moral progress occur. And
in a revolution, you just take those people out
and shoot them. You don't have. But in a
democracy, you can't do that. They're there. And they're
resentful and they're bitter because of what, what you
and I regard as moral progress has cost them.
Also globalization of the economy is a good example,
and they are ripe for being recruited and mobilized
by somebody who'll come along and say, I feel
your pain. I know that you've been mistreated. I
know that society is going in a direction that
you find disgusting that you can't stand. And in
the United States now, there is this tremendous sort
of counter-revolution going on, or reaction, uh, whatever you
call it. And I think it has some very
regressive features. Um, SO, I think that a theory
of moral progress has to include a theory of
regression. And the theory of regression should give a
prominent role to backlash, that is to the, the
paradoxical fact that Moral progress often brings Factors that
cause moral regression. I think that's has not been
sufficiently appreciated.
So, but to to try to tie this to
one of the main topics we've explored today, that
is the struggle between the hierarchs and the resisters.
Do you think that this struggle has produced progressive
results?
Yeah, I think it has in some cases. I
mean, I think that the transition from thinking of
uh The ruler as somebody appointed by God, uh,
uh, who has absolute power over those rules to
the idea that government is a fiduciary agent acting
on behalf of the general welfare, I think that's
a tremendous change. I think the idea that the
law is not in the king's mouth, but that
the law applies equally to everybody is a, a
big advantage. Uh, I think that the idea of
That your birth, who, who your parents are should
not determine, uh, your status in society or your
eligibility for certain, uh, positions, that is the, the
rejection of the idea of hereditary privilege, uh, or
in the French Revolution, the slogan was career is
open to talents, right? It was a fantastic change
because through, throughout all of history in most societies,
Who your parents were, the class you were born
to determined almost everything about your opportunities. So, those
are, and I think that the abolition of chattel
slavery, now I, I say abolition of chattel slavery
because there still is slavery. There's still some chattel
slavery and there are other forms of slavery that
still exist. But people are working on it, you
know, uh, it's interesting is the last time I
consulted this, the, the leader of the contemporary anti-slavery.
Society is a direct descendant of one of the
leaders of the British abolitionist movement. Uh, uh, I
think he's a descendant of either Wilberforce or Clarkson.
So, there, there, there's been an intergenerational community that's
been committed to first wiping out slavery in its
most extreme form, Atlantic chattel slavery, and then attacking
other forms of servitude. Um, AND, uh, I, I
think there has been progress in that. I know
there's been progress in the rights and status of
women. I mean, if you were You know, do
a thought if you, if you were going to
be a woman. When would you like to be
born? I don't think it would be anytime earlier
than now, basically, I think, or, or the last
25 years, I mean. Uh, THE condition of women
in many places, not everywhere, many places.
Well, well, I, I mean, uh, sometimes you actually
hear some crazy things from conservatives where they say
that or claim that women back in the 1950s,
particularly in the US, were happier because they had
kids and stayed home,
so. Yeah, I mean, that, well, that, it raises
an interesting question and that is, uh, what's the
connection between having rights and being happy? Uh, AND,
and getting more rights doesn't necessarily make you happy,
right? Um, BUT at least having, uh, certain rights,
uh, gives you opportunities to pursue paths that you
hope will make you happy. But yeah, I mean,
there is this saying, you know, the truth will
set you free, but it will also make you
miserable, right? And that, that's. Well, that's all too
often true. I mean, um, this actually raises a
question I've been thinking about before, I just mentioned,
and that is, a lot of political philosophers think
that justice is an absolute value. That uh if
there's any uh conflict, it's improper to trade off
some increment of justice for any other value. I
don't think that's right. I think in some cases,
uh, Welfare matters more than justice. Uh, SUPPOSE you
have two job options, and one of them, you
got high pay, great benefits, opportunities for advancement, but
there's still a little residual discrimination against you as
a woman. It's not fully just. The other alternative
is a job where there's no discrimination against you
as a woman, the pay is lousy, the benefits
are lousy, there are no opportunities for advancement. WHICH
job would you choose? If you say I would
choose the one that's fully just, you're putting an
absolute value on justice relative to everything else. I
think that's not. That's not reasonable. Uh, BUT once
you recognize there could be trade-offs between justice and
welfare, the criticism of capitalism becomes much more complicated,
right? Because whatever else you can say about capitalism,
it delivers higher levels of welfare for more people.
That has ever occurred in history. Now it does
that by a system of incentives that predictably generates
unjust inequalities. Right, right, so what do you want?
I mean, you could get, maybe you can get
rid of all those unjust inequalities, but you undercut
the incentive system that produces the general prosperity. I
think we've got excessive inequality in the US, right?
I don't think to have an acceptable level of
welfare in the US, Elon Musk has to have
$400 billion right? So there's welfare necessary equalities of
capitalism. There are surplus inequalities. And I think That
most existing capitalist countries have high levels of surplus
and equality, and for that reason, They're not acceptable,
even if you think that welfare could be traded
off against justice to some extent. Mhm.
OK, so let me ask you then finally, um,
when it comes to this struggle between the hierarchs
and the resisters, do you think that an understanding
of it, uh, of uh how it has occurred
so far, can yield knowledge of how to curb
the tendency of hierarchs to abuse their power?
I think so, and I wanna revert back to
something you brought up, that is the epistemic dimension
of the struggle. I think that what we've learned
from looking at the history of the struggle is
that when the struggle produces improvements in the social
epistemic environment, It equips resistors with more resources for
making further improvements. So I think that's one of
the things that is important in thinking about how
we can restrain hierarchy. By the way, I think
that the object is not to abolish hierarchy. I
think the complex, large-scale societies need some kind of
hierarchy. Uh, THE question is, can you, uh, have
hierarchies that are less prone to abuse rather than
more prone to abuse? Uh, uh, AND, and I
also think, this is really speculative, that in a
modern large-scale complex pluralistic society, you can't sustain a
hierarchy. Without a lot of coercion, unless there's an
ideology. That supports the hierarchy. So I'm not in
favor of either trying to get rid of ideologies
or hierarchies. Uh, I'm more concerned with how you
can identify and promulgate ideologies that are. Less destructive
than many are and how you can have hierarchies
that are uh less prone to abuse than the
ones that we've had in the past. Um, And
I think you can learn something from past experiences
about that. Uh, uh, uh, uh, GAINS in the
epistemic, the social epidemic environment where more people have
access to knowledge that's relevant to judging the behavior
of the hierarchs, right? And can communicate with other
people, their dissatisfaction with the hierarchy and can mobilize
because of the information technologies. That's crucial. Anything that
can be done to improve that is likely to
uh give, you have to think about what are
the resources of resistors for curbing the abuses hierarchy.
And I think their epistemic resources are of crucial
importance, education. Information technology access, uh, And also there
has to be a certain amount of transparency on
the part of the way the hierarchs operate. There
has to be information available about what the hell
they're doing. Uh, AND of course, it's in their
interest to, to not let us know what they're
doing. So there's a struggle for access to information
about what they're actually doing. Right.
So I have just one final question then, uh,
and uh on the topic of hierarchy, and I
guess that it connects to some of what you
just said there. Do you think that hierarchy is
unavoidable?
I think if you're gonna have a well-functioning large-scale,
complex society with a plurality of values, uh, I
think you have to have hierarchy of some kind.
I don't, and organization theorists say this. They say
for any large-scale organization, Whether it's a state or
a corporation. You need some structure of authority to
reduce transaction costs, to be able to come to
decisions about what to do rather than just sort
of endlessly debating about it, that there are efficiency
constraints that that push you in the direction of
having some kind of hierarchy. In large scale complex
organizations. I, I, I think that's That's right. Um,
SO it's not a question of, you know, finally
defeating a hierarchy. It's a matter of controlling hierarchies.
Uh, THAT'S the crucial question, uh, and, and what's
the role of ideology in either controlling them or
making them less. Subject to control.
Mhm. OK, great. So, the book is again, Ideology
and Revolution, how the struggle Against domination Drives the
evolution of morality and the institutions. I'm, of course,
leaving a link with in the description of the
interview. And Doctor Buchanan, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show again.
It's been a really fascinating conversation. Well,
thank you for the opportunity. I said this before
in a previous interview. You are by far the
best interviewer I've ever encountered. I've had a lot
of them, but you really read and understand the
work and you ask the best questions, and you
allow enough time. This is really important, uh. Yeah.
01 last thing. I want you to engineer a
trip to Portugal for me. I want, uh, I,
I, I've been to Portugal once. I really loved
it. I thought the people were incredibly generous and
beautiful country, and, uh, and sometime I wanna talk
to you about how, how little Portugal has maintained
its independence from Spain. Over the centuries, right? I
mean, when you look at the map, you'd say,
Why don't the Spanish control the whole thing? Right?
Now, I know it has to do with alliances
to some extent, like with the British.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski,
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai,
Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio
Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior. Old
Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Janus
Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.